मध्योद्भवे भुव इलावृतनाम्नि वर्षे
गौरीप्रधानवनिताजनमात्रभाजि ।
शर्वेण मन्त्रनुतिभि: समुपास्यमानं
सङ्कर्षणात्मकमधीश्वर संश्रये त्वाम् ॥१॥
मध्य-उद्भवे भुव:	in the middle of the earth
इलावृत-नाम्नि वर्षे	in the region called Ilaavrata
गौरी-प्रधान-वनिताजन-मात्र-भाजि	Gauri as their chief, inhabited solely by women
शर्वेण	by Lord Shiva (as Ardhnaareeshwara)
मन्त्र-नुतिभि:	by mantras and hymns
समुपास्यमानं	(Thou) being worshipped
सङ्कर्षण-आत्मकम्-	in the form of Sankarshana
अधीश्वर	O Almighty Lord!
संश्रये	(I) seek refuge (in)
त्वाम्	Thee
In the middle of the earth is the region called Ilaavrata which is inhabited exclusively by women with Gauri as their chief. I seek refuge in Thee O Lord! Who are present there as Sankarshana and are worshipped with holy chants by Sharva (Shiva) in his 'man-woman' form known as Ardhanaareeshwara.
भद्राश्वनामक इलावृतपूर्ववर्षे
भद्रश्रवोभि: ऋषिभि: परिणूयमानम् ।
कल्पान्तगूढनिगमोद्धरणप्रवीणं
ध्यायामि देव हयशीर्षतनुं भवन्तम् ॥२॥
भद्राश्व-नामक	(known) by rhe name Bhadraashva
इलावृत-पूर्व-वर्षे	in the region east of Ilaavrata
भद्रश्रवोभि: ऋषिभि:	(where) by the Rishis known as Bhadraashwaras
परिणूयमानम्	praised (Thou)
कल्पान्त-गूढ-निगम-उद्धरण-प्रवीणं	at the end of the Kalpa, (which were) lost, the Vedas, in restoring, who is expert, (Thou),
ध्यायामि	I meditate on (Thee)
देव	O Lord!
हयशीर्ष-तनुं भवन्तम्	Thou who has taken the form of Hayagreeva
In the region known as Bhadraashva, situated to the east of Ilaavrata, O Lord! Thou resides as Hayagreeva. I meditate on this horse-necked form of Thine which is famed as the restorer of the Vedas lost in the deluge at the end of the cosmic cycle. This Hayagreeva form of Thine is worshipped by the Rishis Bhadraashwara with hymns of praises.
ध्यायामि दक्षिणगते हरिवर्षवर्षे
प्रह्लादमुख्यपुरुषै: परिषेव्यमाणम् ।
उत्तुङ्गशान्तधवलाकृतिमेकशुद्ध-
ज्ञानप्रदं नरहरिं भगवन् भवन्तम् ॥३॥
ध्यायामि	I meditate (on Thee)
दक्षिणगते हरिवर्षवर्षे	towards the south (of Ilaavrata) in Harivarsha
प्रह्लाद-मुख्य-पुरुषै:	by Prahlaad and other leading people
परिषेव्यमाणम्	(being) worshipped
उत्तुङ्ग-धवल-आकृतिम्-	(as one) who is very tall, calm and white in color
एकशुद्ध-ज्ञान-प्रदम्	who bestows the highest pure knowledge
नरहरिं	in the form of Narahari
भगवन्	O Lord!
भवन्तं	Thee (I meditate on)
To the south of Ilaavrata is Harivarsha. There Thou are worshipped by Prahlaad and other leading devotees as Narahari, whose body is tall and white and who is calm and bestows the knowledge of Supreme Brahman. O Lord! I meditate on that form of Thee.
वर्षे प्रतीचि ललितात्मनि केतुमाले
लीलाविशेषललितस्मितशोभनाङ्गम् ।
लक्ष्म्या प्रजापतिसुतैश्च निषेव्यमाणं
तस्या: प्रियाय धृतकामतनुं भजे त्वाम् ॥४॥
वर्षे प्रतीचि	in the region to the west of Ilaavrata
ललित-आत्मनि	in the very beautiful
केतुमाले	Ketumaala
लीला-विशेष-ललित-स्मित-शोभन-अङ्गम्	with a divine sporting and charming smile, having a resplendent form (Thou)
लक्ष्म्या	by Lakshmi
प्रजापतिसुतै: च	and by the sons of Prajaapati
निषेव्यमाणम्	worshipped
तस्या: प्रियाय	for her pleasure
धृत-काम-तनुम्	taking the form of Kaamadeva
भजे त्वाम्	I worship Thee
To the west of Ilaavrata, in the beautiful region of Ketumaalaa, Thou resides as Kaamadeva, for the pleasure of Lakshmi. Thy form is resplendent with a divine sportive and charming smile. Thou are worshipped by Lakshmi and the sons of Prajaapati. I worship Thee.
रम्ये ह्युदीचि खलु रम्यकनाम्नि वर्षे
तद्वर्षनाथमनुवर्यसपर्यमाणम् ।
भक्तैकवत्सलममत्सरहृत्सु भान्तं
मत्स्याकृतिं भुवननाथ भजे भवन्तम् ॥५॥
रम्ये हि उदीचि खलु	In the beautiful (region) to the north of Ilaavrata
रम्यक-नाम्नि वर्षे	in the region called Ramyak
तत्-वर्ष-नाथ-मनुवर्य-	by that region's ruler, Manu
सपर्यमाणम्	(Thou) being worshipped
भक्त-एक-वत्सलम्-	(Thou) who is benevolent to His devotees
अमत्सर-हृत्सु भन्तं	in the hearts of all pure hearted people (thou) who shines,
मत्स्य-आकृतिं	in a fish form
भुवननाथ	O Lord of the Universe!
भजे भवन्तं	I worship Thee
In the beautiful region of Ramyak to the north of Ilaavrata whose ruler Vaivaswata Manu worships Thee in Thy form of a fish. Thou who are very benevolent to Thy devotees and who shine in the hearts of those who are free from attachments, I worship Thee in the form of the fish.
वर्षं हिरण्मयसमाह्वयमौत्तराह-
मासीनमद्रिधृतिकर्मठकामठाङ्गम् ।
संसेवते पितृगणप्रवरोऽर्यमा यं
तं त्वां भजामि भगवन् परचिन्मयात्मन् ॥६॥
वर्षं	the region
हिरण्मय-समाह्वयम्-	Hiranmaya', known as
औत्तराहम्-	to the north (of Ramyak)
आसीनम्-	residing there
अद्रि-धृति-कर्मठ-कामठ-अङ्गम्	the mountain (Mandaar) bearing, capable of, in the form of the tortoise, on the back
संसेवते	who is worshipped by
पितृगण-प्रवर:-अर्यमा	the chief of the Pitriganas, Aryamaa,
यं तं त्वां	Which,That Thee
भजामि भगवन्	I worship O Lord!
परचिन्मय-आत्मन्	O Supreme Light of Consciousness!
The region called Hiranmaya which is to the north of Ramyak, Thou reside there in the form of the huge tortoise that could bear the Mandara mountain on its back. There Thou are worshipped by Aryamaa the famous chief of the Pitris. O Lord! O Supreme Pure Consciousness! I worship Thy that form.
किञ्चोत्तरेषु कुरुषु प्रियया धरण्या
संसेवितो महितमन्त्रनुतिप्रभेदै: ।
दंष्ट्राग्रघृष्टघनपृष्ठगरिष्ठवर्ष्मा
त्वं पाहि बिज्ञनुत यज्ञवराहमूर्ते ॥७॥
किम्-च	further
उत्तरेषु	to the north (of Hiranmaya)
कुरुषु	(in the region known as) in Kuru
प्रियया धरण्या	by Thy consort the Earth
संसेवित:	well worshipped
महित-मन्त्र-नुति-प्रभेदै:	by various great mantras and hymns
दंष्ट्र-अग्र-घृष्ट-घन-पृष्ठ-गरिष्ष्ठ-वर्ष्मा	(Thou whose) tusks' ends touched the clouds with such a huge body
त्वं पाहि	Thou protect me
विज्ञ-नुत यज्ञ-वराह-मूर्ते	by the enlightened ones adored, (O Thou) in the form of the Yanjya Varaaha
To the north of Hiranmaya, Thou are worshipped by Thy dear consort the Earth, with the utterances of holy Mantras and hymns of praise. Thou are adored by the wise in the form of Yanjya Varaaha (the divine boar) whose gigantic body rose so high that the tusks' edges rubbed against the clouds. Do protect Thy devotees.
याम्यां दिशं भजति किंपुरुषाख्यवर्षे
संसेवितो हनुमता दृढभक्तिभाजा ।
सीताभिरामपरमाद्भुतरूपशाली
रामात्मक: परिलसन् परिपाहि विष्णो ॥८॥
याम्यां दिशं भजति	situated to the south (of Ilaavrata)
किंपुरुष-आख्य-वर्षे	'Kimpurusha', known as, in that region
संसेवित:	worshipped
हनुमता	by Hanumaan
दृढ-भक्तिभाजा	who has firm devotion to Thee
सीता-अभिराम-परम-अद्भुत-रूप-शाली	(and) Sita is captivated by (Thy) form which is most wonderful and resplendent
रमात्मक: परिलसन्	as Raama shining
परिपाहि	do protect
विष्णो	O Lord! Vishnu!
Towards the south of Ilaavrata, residing in the region known as Kimpurusha, Thou are worshipped by Hanumaan with firm and unwavering devotion. O Lord Vishnu! Thou as Raama do shine with a wonderful and resplendent form form that captivates Sita and is made more charming by her presence. Do protect us, O Vishnu!
श्रीनारदेन सह भारतखण्डमुख्यै-
स्त्वं साङ्ख्ययोगनुतिभि: समुपास्यमान: ।
आकल्पकालमिह साधुजनाभिरक्षी
नारायणो नरसख: परिपाहि भूमन् ॥९॥
श्री-नारदेन सह	along with Shree Naarada
भारत-खण्ड-मुख्यै:-	by the foremost (devotees) of Bhaaratavarsha
त्वं	Thou
सांख्य-योग-नुतिभि:	with the hymns based on Saankhya and Yoga systems
समुपास्यमान:	well meditated upon
आकल्प-कालम्-इह	till Pralaya time, here (in Bhaaratavarsha)
साधुजन-अभिरक्षी	the virtuous protecting,
नारायण: नरसख:	(Thou) Naaraayana (who has) and Nara as companion
परिपाहि	do protect
भूमन्	O Lord of the Universe!
Along with Naarada, by the leading devotees of Bhaarata region Thou are meditated upon and praised with hymns based on Saankhya and Yoga. In Bhaaratavarsha as Naaraayana with Nara as companion, Thou do reside till Pralaya (deluge) time,for the protection of the virtuous. Deign to protect all devotees.
प्लाक्षेऽर्करूपमयि शाल्मल इन्दुरूपं
द्वीपे भजन्ति कुशनामनि वह्निरूपम् ।
क्रौञ्चेऽम्बुरूपमथ वायुमयं च शाके
त्वां ब्रह्मरूपमपि पुष्करनाम्नि लोका: ॥१०॥
प्लाक्षे-अर्क-रूपम्-	in Plaaksha, in the form of the Sun
अयि	O Thou!
शाल्मले इन्दुरूपं	in Shaalmala, in the form of the moon
द्वीपे भजन्ति कुश-नामनि	in the island named Kusha, people worship,
वह्नि-रूपम्	(Thee) in the form of Fire
क्रौञ्चे-अम्बु-रूपम्-	in Kraunch as water
अथ वायु-मयं च शाके	and then as wind in Shaaka
त्वां ब्रह्म-रूपम्-अपि	Thee also in the form of Brahmaa
पुष्कर-नाम्नि लोका:	in (the place) called Pushkara by people (are worshipped)
O Lord! Thou are worshipped by the people in the form of the sun in Plaaksha, as the Moon in Shaalmala, as fire in Kushadveep, as water in Kraunch, as wind in Shaaka and as Brahmaa in the place named Pushkara.
सर्वैर्ध्रुवादिभिरुडुप्रकरैर्ग्रहैश्च
पुच्छादिकेष्ववयवेष्वभिकल्प्यमानै: ।
त्वं शिंशुमारवपुषा महतामुपास्य:
सन्ध्यासु रुन्धि नरकं मम सिन्धुशायिन् ॥११॥
सर्बै:-ध्रुव-आदिभि:-उडुप्रकरै:-	by all, Dhruva etc., the groups of stars
ग्रहै:-च	and by the planets
पुच्छ-आदिकेषु अवयवेषु-	as tail etc., in the limbs
अभिकल्प्यमानै:	imagined
त्वं शिंशुमार-वपुषा	Thou, the great Fish Sinshumaar bodied
महताम्-उपास्य:	by the enlightened meditated upon
सन्ध्यासु	at the (three) Sandhyaas
रुन्धि नरकं मम	eradicate hell (sufferings) of mine
सिन्धुशायिन्	O Resident of the Milk Ocean
Dhruva - the Pole star, and all the groups of stars and planets who are imagined as forming the limbs and tail of the great Fish Shinshumaar, in that form , Thou are meditated upon by the enlightened ones, at the three Sandhyaas. O Lord! Reposing on the Milk Ocean! deign to eradicate my suffering and my sins.
पातालमूलभुवि शेषतनुं भवन्तं
लोलैककुण्डलविराजिसहस्रशीर्षम् ।
नीलाम्बरं धृतहलं भुजगाङ्गनाभि-
र्जुष्टं भजे हर गदान् गुरुगेहनाथ ॥१२॥
पाताल-मूल-भुवि	of Paataala's bottom surface
शेष-तनुं भवन्तं	in Aadishesha's form, Thee
लोल-ऐक-कुण्डल-विराजि-सहस्र-शीर्षम्	(weith)dangling one earring and shining in the thousand heads
नीलाम्बरं	wearring a blue garment
धृत-हलं	armed with a plough
भुजग-अङ्गनाभि:-जुष्टं	by serpent women worshipped
भजे	I adore
शेषतनुं भवन्तं	the Aadishesha bodied Thee
हर गदान्	eradicate my ailments
गुरुगेहनाथ	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
I worship Thee as Aadishesha the great serpent. Thou residing at the bottom of Paataal, having a thousand heads, which shine with a single ever quivering earing, wearing a blue garment, and having a plough as weapon, are worshipped by Naaga (serpent) damsels. May Thou O Lord of Guruvaayur be pleased to relieve me of my ailments.